The development of machine learning and ensemble approaches to predict and detect heart disease would be of great clinical value, but they are extremely challenging. As a result, there is a significant rate of incorrectly diagnosed cases and a lack of cardiovascular expertise in most countries. By combining analytical support for clinical decision-making with digital patient records, accurate and efficient early-stage stroke prediction could be developed to address these problems. In this research, we aimed to identify machine learning classification and ensemble algorithms with the highest accuracy for such diagnostic purposes. We also aimed to explain the results of those algorithms with LIME and SHAP explainable models. For the prediction of stroke, several supervised machine-learning algorithms and ensemble algorithms were applied and compared. All features were ranked based on importance to select those with the highest prediction of stroke. In this study, we found that using a stroke dataset collected from Kaggle, seven machine learning algorithms and three ensembles based on Random Forest, and Stacking algorithms achieved 99% accuracy and 100% accuracy along with 100% specificity and sensitivity. Therefore, we found that supervised machine learning and an ensemble algorithm can be used to predict heart disease with a high level of accuracy and excellent potential utility. Also, anyone who is not an expert can understand the reason for one prediction by the LIME and SHAP explanation.
